[Breaking] New Custom Application docs for v21 release. (#2431)
commercetools/merchant-center-application-kit: website/src/content/development/data-fetching.mdx

---
title: Data Fetching
---

In client-side applications, data fetching is not always easy and it usually involves a lot of boilerplate code around implementation, state management, data normalization, etc.

> The commercetools platform and the Merchant Center have first-class support for GraphQL and we **strongly recommend to build your Custom Application using GraphQL** wherever possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The commercetools platform and the Merchant Center have first-class support for GraphQL and we **strongly recommend building your Custom Application using GraphQL** wherever possible.
```

To handle requests to the [GraphQL APIs](/concepts/merchant-center-api#graphql) we use the built-in [Apollo GraphQL Client](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react/).

<Info>

The Apollo Client comes already pre-configured in a Custom Application to connect to the `/graphql` endpoint of the [Merchant Center API](/concepts/merchant-center-api#graphql).

</Info>

> # Using React Hooks

Author: Yeah I think we can keep it lowercase.

We recommend to extract the logic into what we call "connector hooks."

A connector hook is a React hook that implements most of the data requirements (queries and mutations) specific to the use cases where the data should be used.

For example, we can extract fetching of Channels into a connector hook named `useChannelsFetcher`.
This hook can be put into a file named `use-channels-connector.js`.

```js title="use-channels-connector.js"
import { useQuery } from '@apollo/client/react';
import { GRAPHQL_TARGETS } from '@commercetools-frontend/constants';

export const useChannelsFetcher = () => {
  const { data, error, loading } = useQuery(FetchChannelsQuery, {
    context: {
      target: GRAPHQL_TARGETS.COMMERCETOOLS_PLATFORM,
    }
  });

  return {
    channels: data?.channels,
    error,
    loading,
  };
};
```

<Info>

Note that the `use-channels-connector.js` file can contain multiple connector hooks. For example `useChannelsFetcher`, `useChannelsUpdater`, `useChannelsCreator`, and so on.

</Info>

> We would then use our connector hook in the `Channels` component instead of using the Apollo Client hooks directly. Therefore, there is less code in the React component as most of the logic and configuration is abstracted away in the connector hook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We would then use our connector hook in the `Channels` component instead of directly using the Apollo Client hooks. Therefore, there is less code in the React component as most of the logic and configuration is abstracted away in the connector hook.
```

```js title="channels.js" highlightLines="3,6"
import { ContentNotification } from '@commercetools-uikit/notifications';
import Text from '@commercetools-uikit/text';
import { useChannelsFetcher } from '../../hooks/use-channels-connector';

const Channels = (props) => {
  const { channels, error } = useChannelsFetcher();

  if (error) {
    return (
      <ContentNotification type="error">
        <Text.Body>{getErrorMessage(error)}</Text.Body>
      </ContentNotification>
    );
  }

  return (
    <div>
      {/* Do something with `channels` */}
    </div>
  );
};
```

<!-- TODO: ## Using fetch policy -->
<!-- TODO: ## Customizing Apollo Cache -->

## Connecting to an external GraphQL API

> In case your Custom Application needs to connect to an [external GraphQL API](/concepts/integrate-with-your-own-api), in addition to the commercetools GraphQL APIs, the Apollo Client needs to be reconfigured to connect to the `/proxy/forward-to` endpoint with the appropriate headers.

Author: Yes that's correct

const HelloWorld = () => {
  const { loading, data, error } = useMcQuery(HelloWorldQuery, {
    context: createApolloContextForProxyForwardTo({
      uri: 'https://my-custom-app.com/graphql',
    }),
  });

  if (loading) return 'Loading...';
  if (error) return `Error! ${error.message}`;
  return <Text.Headline as="h1">{data.title}</Text.Headline>;
}
```

<!-- TODO: see [@/application-shell](/api-reference/commercetools-frontend-application-shell) for more information. -->

## Requests to REST APIs

Some endpoints or APIs might not be available as GraphQL but as a standard HTTP REST endpoint instead.

In theory you can use any HTTP client library of your choice to do so. However, for Custom Applications we provide a declarative fetching library [`@commercetools-frontend/sdk`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@commercetools-frontend/sdk), which builds on top of the [JS SDK client](https://commercetools.github.io/nodejs/sdk/api/sdkClient.html) and [Redux](https://redux.js.org/)

<Info>

The SDK library comes already pre-configured in a Custom Application to connect to the `/proxy/:target/*` endpoints of the [Merchant Center API](/concepts/merchant-center-api#proxytarget).

</Info>

> The SDK library is built using Redux actions, meaning that you dispatch an action describing the request and the library takes care of handling the request.

Author: No worries. 

So the SDK library is a wrapper around our JS SDK (https://commercetools.github.io/nodejs/sdk/api/sdkClient.html), which works using "middlewares".

For Custom Applications, we wanted to use the underlying JS SDK client but make it simpler to use as well as to pre-configure it to use the MC API (e.g. headers, etc.).

When we started working on the MC, we were using a lot Redux (now not so much anymore) and we came up with this "redux" approach for sending HTTP requests.

Essentially, you dispatch an action describing the HTTP request and the SDK package takes care of properly constructing the HTTP request and handling the response/errors.

Therefore, to use it you need to dispatch an action like you would do with any Redux action.

Hopefully this clarifies things a bit more.

> The SDK library is built using Redux actions, meaning that you dispatch an action describing the request and the library takes care of handling the request.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the explanation. 👍
